1
1.1 Background to the study
CHAPTER ONE 
INTRODUCTION
Sales strategy is a documented plan for positioning and selling your product or service to 
qualified buyers in a way that differentiates your solution from your competitors (Azadi 
and Rahimzadeh, 2018).
Sales strategies are meant to provide clear objectives and guidance to your sales 
organization. They typically include key information like growth goals, KPIs, buyer 
personas, sales processes, team structure, competitive analysis, product positioning, and 
specific selling methodologies (Shane, 2019).
Sales strategy is the extent to which a firm engages in a set of activities and decisions 
regarding the allocation of scarce sales resources (i.e., people, selling effort, money) to 
manage customer relationships on the basis of the value of each customer for the firm 
(Campbell-Hunt, 2020). Sales strategy is a set of decisions, actions, and goals that inform 
how your sales team positions the organization and its products to close new customers. It 
acts as a guide for sales reps to follow, with clear objectives regarding sales processes, 
product positioning, and competitive analysis (Berson & Avolio, 2019). Strong sales 
strategy plan creates the foundation for a cohesive and successful sales organization. Sales 
Strategy has become important tool globally for any organization to remain in competitive 
market environment and stronger. Aremu and Lawal (2019) sees strategy as a pattern of 
resource allocation decisions made throughout an organization. This encapsulates both 
desired goals and beliefs about what are acceptable and most critically unacceptable means 
for achieving them. Aremu and Lawal, (2019) say that strategy implies that the analysis of 
the market and its environment, customer buying behaviour, competitive activities and the 
need and capabilities of marketing intermediaries. Marketing strategy therefore, can be 
defined as a method by which a firm attempts to reach its target markets.
Strategy development starts with market research, in which needs and attitudes and 
competitors' products are assessed and continues through into advertising, promotion, 
distribution and where applicable, customer servicing, packaging, sales and distribution.
2
Marketing strategy must focus on delivering greater value to customers and the firm at a 
lower cost (Chiliya et al, 2019). Owomoyela et al, (2018) also see marketing strategy as 
way of providing a quality product that satisfies customer needs, offering affordable price 
and engaging in wider distribution and back it up with effective promotion strategy. 
Marketing strategy is a vital prerequisite of Industry's ability to strengthen its market share 
and minimize the impact of the competition.
Sales strategy is the component of a marketing plan anticipated once an in-depth marketing 
research is conducted. It assists a firm to channel its resources which are typically scarce 
on the best possible task so as to improve their sales. In the contemporary business milieu, 
which is competitive prone, marketing can be perceived as an array of business activities 
structured to plan, produce, price, promote, distribute goods, service, and ideas for the 
satisfaction of applicable customers and clients (Dzisi & Ofosu 2014). This implies that in 
the distribution of products from the seller to the consumer, several marketing activities 
are involved in the chain of distribution.
Sales strategy is a vital criterion to an organization’s knack for reinforcing its market share 
and minimizing the impact of the competition (Kenu 2019). Mohammadzadeh, Aarabi & 
Salamzadeh (2018) defined sale strategy as a strategy focused on events regarding 
competitor and customer analysis, context analysis, segmentation, targeting, and outlining 
a suitable standing based on marketing mix. The marketing mix is an admixture of actions 
and decisions an organization makes to identify customer demands and to complete 
marketing objectives (Mohammadzadeh et al., 2018). Liu & Yang, (2014) stated how 
marketing strategies are among the foremost reasons for new product development and 
success. Azadi and Rahimzadeh (2018) suggested that the marketing mix consists of the 
combination of (a) product, (b) price, (c) place, and (d) promotion.
The insurance industry is one of the industries which have influenced the development of 
different communities. The industry plays a significant role to develop of different 
economic sectors. By covering damage caused by economic activity and community 
development, it increases the incentives to invest. One of the features of the insurance 
companies is that they are at the core of financial issues. In addition to securing economic 
activities through the provision of insurance services, they can cause the mobility and the
3
development of the capital markets through participation and development of the financial 
industry build in the financial markets. Apart from providing security and peace of mind, 
it alleviates worries concerned with unforeseen events. In this way, the cycle of life and 
work flow more smoothly (Abedi, 2019). Without the backing and support of insurance 
coverage, the activities of different sectors of economic activity would be accompanied 
with fear and uncertainty given that one of the fundamental factors of growth and 
development of security is an investment. Through insurance coverage and with any 
investment, they have tried to provide more and better services which would not be realized 
without insurance. Although the insurance industry has had an acceptable growth in the 
past decade, it has not shed an in-depth look at the basic needs of its customers. With the 
increasing number of insurance companies, competition among them has increased. This 
has been followed by consequences such as loss of sales and market share
A successful sales strategy must tell an organization where they would want to be on a 
long-term basis that is why it is often said that marketing strategy is a continuous process. 
Marketing strategy is seen as the marketing logic by which the business will hope to 
achieve its marketing objectives. In the business organization, there is safely no activity 
where the marketer must not therefore make the right decision about the four components 
of the marketing mix - price, product, place/distribution and promotion through the 
employment of marketing strategy. These key components must be coordinated and moved 
into a unified effective strategy if the product must perform well in the market. It consists 
of specific strategies for target markets, marketing mix and marketing budget.
It is however difficult for a business organization to remain competitive as well as thrive 
in the dynamic business environment without applying various marketing strategies to its 
operations (Mitchelmore & Rowley, 2018). They further indicate that one of the most 
important questions in the business environment is why some firms succeed while others 
fail. This has influenced research on the drivers of a firm’s performance. It has also been 
argued that for a company to be successful it has to record returns and identify 
organizational performance drivers’ right from the top to the bottom of the company. 
Nzioka and Njuguna (2017) view this performance as the formula assessment for the
4
functioning of an organization based on certain parameters like effectiveness, productivity, 
and employee morale with the aim of gaining a sustainable competitive advantage.
Performance of companies has traditionally been measured by considering the revenues or 
profits that are made at the end of the year using key financial ratios (Kazan & Özer, 2016). 
organizational performance is a multi-dimensional construct consisting of revenues and a 
cost-based 3 financial performance, customer-related performance, employee-related 
performance and innovation related performance, Rinaldo and Solimun (2017).
1.2 Statement of the problem
In current business activities, the success or failure of any business organization hinge on 
how best such organization can fulfill its customers and this act places huge task and 
responsibility by way of marketing on any organization intending to excel at satisfying 
their customers and clients. The duty involves identifying the precise needs of their 
customers/clients and deciding on how best to handle their products and services so as to 
satisfy the wants of both prospective buyers and sellers (as represented by 
clients/customers). The main concern of every business organization is to maximize profit 
and to achieve this objective; it befits the marketing manager of any rational business 
organization to plan and implement policies which will maximize the income per unit of 
capital employed in the business. It is said that understanding of consumer needs and wants 
is important to successful marketing just as competition is significant at influencing how 
successful an organization's business enterprise can be.
It is imperative to note that it is not simply a matter of producing a good product or service 
alone that meet the customers' wants and needs that give customer satisfaction, but how 
well the product or service is introduced to them. In one way or the other, some firms and 
companies are able to do this but some are more successful in the market place than others. 
The question that then arises is why is this so? With reports of the varying degree of 
successes and failures recorded by insurance firms in different parts of Nigeria, it is 
imperative to attempt to carry out a detailstudy of the varioussalesstrategies being adopted 
by these firms in carrying out their operations with a view to establishing the place of 
marketing in their organizational performances
5
1.3 Objectives of the study
The objective of this study is to evaluate the effect of sales strategy on the organizational 
performance with reference to AIICO Insurance in Lagos State. Specifically, the following 
specific objectives will be pursued.
i) To determine the effect of Customer segmentation on organizational performance
ii) To assess the impact of Customer Prioritization on organizational profitability
iii) To examine the effect of sales model adoption on company’s market share
iv) To evaluate the impact of multiple sales channels on organizational sales performance
1.4 Research questions
i) How does Customer segmentation affect the organizational performance?
ii) To what extent does Customer Prioritization affect organizational profitability?
iii) What is the effect of product sales model adoption on company’s market share?
iv) To what extent does multiple sales channels affect organizational sales performance?
1.5 Research hypothesis
Accordingly, following are the hypothesis to be tested for this study:
H0: Customer segmentation does not influence the organizational performance
Hi: Customer segmentation influence organizational performance
H0: There is no significant effect of Customer Prioritization on organization profitability 
Hi: There is significant effect of Customer Prioritization on organization profitability 
H0: sales model adoption does not have positive impact on company’s market share
Hi: sales model adoption has positive impact on company’s market share
H0: There is no significant effect of multiple sales channels on organizational sales 
performance
6
Hi: There is significant effect of multiple sales channels on organizational sales 
performance
1.6 Significance of the study
The management various organization will find this study an invaluable source of material 
in developing and harnessing their competitive strategies in the present evolving and 
dynamic business environment. This study will provide insight on some of the challenges 
that may be faced in the development and implementation of sales strategy and how they 
can resolve them.
The government and regulators of the industry will also find invaluable information in how 
marketing strategies can be adopted and as a result put in place policies that will guide and 
encourage other organizations within and without the industry in implementing their 
strategies in an ethical manner. The policy makers could use the results of the study to 
identify and bridge up gaps in the existing marketing strategies.
Marketing Professionals will practically utilize the actual strategies that are evaluated in 
this study. This study’s findings would therefore guide them in creating winning marketing 
campaigns for their respective organizations.
Scholars and researchers would find this study a meaningful component of the available 
body of knowledge on the. The findings of the study would also contribute to the literature 
review efforts of future researchers.
1.7 Scope of the study
The study is limited to finding the effect ofsalesstrategy on the organizational performance 
with reference to AIICO Insurance in Lagos State, Journals, online articles, textbook will 
be relied upon for literature review in other to get more comprehensive views on the topic 
of study.
7
1.8 Operational definition of terms
Communication: The concept or state of exchanging information between entitles. 
Customer: One who purchases or receives a product or service from a business or 
merchant, or intends to do so.
Diversification strategy: Diversification strategy refers to the strategy that a company 
adopts for the development of its business which involves widening the scope of the 
company across various products and market sectors.
Growth Strategies: Growth strategies refers to strategic planning tool by Igor Ansoff 
that offers a framework to help company executives, the senior managers and marketers 
to devise the strategies for future growth or prospectus
Market Penetration: market penetration refers to the successful selling of the service 
or product in an intended market and can be measured in terms of sales volume of the 
existing good or service in respect to the total target market for the product or service. 
Organizational Performance: organizational performance refers to the actual output 
or the results of the organization as measured against the intended outputs and the 
outputs can be looked in three specific areas that is financial performance, product 
market performance and the shareholder returns.
Product Development: Product development is the series of steps of the complete 
process that brings a new product into the market by considering conceptualization, the 
design, the development and marketing of the newly created or rebranded good or 
service in the market.
Persuasion: The act of one’s ability or power to influence someone’s opinions or 
feelings.
Product: Any tangible or intangibles good or service that is a result of a process and 
that intended for delivery to a customer or end user.
Strategy: Strategy refers to a high plan in order to achieve one or more goals under 
conditions of uncertainty that is the plan of action that directs how organizational policies 
as well as practices are framed and executed to effectively assign the structure and manage 
corporate scarce resources to achieve organizational goals.
8
1.9 Historical background of AIICO Insurance Plc
AIICO commenced operations in Nigeria in 1963 as an Agency office of American Life 
Insurance Company (“ALICO”) – at the time, a subsidiary of American International 
Group (“AIG”). The Company was incorporated, registered and licensed in Nigeria as 
American Life Insurance Company Limited – as a wholly owned subsidiary of 
ALICO/AIG – in 1970 – to offer Life and insurance services. The Company was renamed 
American International Insurance Company Limited (“AIICO”) upon the acquisition of a 
60% stake by the Federal Government of Nigeria, and later listed on the Nigerian Stock 
Exchange in 1990, after which both shareholders – the Federal Government of Nigeria and 
AIG divested.
1. Life and general insurance are strategic business divisions within AIICO
2. AIICO Capital Limited – a subsidiary of AIICO providing asset management 
services for AIICO and 3rd parties
3. AIICO Multishield Limited – a leading health maintenance organisation
Following the insurance industry's consolidation in 2007, the Company acquired NFI 
Insurance PLC and Lamda Insurance Company Limited (both cumulatively accounting for
less than 30% of AIICO's pre-acquisition gross premiums). The Company subsequently re certified as both a General Insurance and Life Assurance Company – taking advantage of 
its legacy, brand, franchise and strong retail distribution network to grow a leading General 
Insurance business.
Our Goal
As an insurance company, AIICO's goal is to be the insurer of choice and the leading 
insurance company in Nigeria – providing life insurance and retirement services as well as 
risk underwriting to a substantial and diversified client base, which includes corporations, 
financial institutions, governments and individuals in Nigeria.
AIICO is the market leader in Retail Life insurance and retirement services and is a market 
leader in Non-Life insurance in Nigeria. The core insurance franchise is complemented by 
our leading insurance asset management, and health management businesses.
9
AIICO also owns valuable financial and strategic assets including a controlling stake in 
Multishield Limited, and a 19% stake in Healthcare International Limited (both healthcare 
management organizations (“HMOs”)), and AIICO Capital Limited (an asset management 
wholly-owned subsidiary).
10
REFERENCES
Aremu M.A and Lawal A.T, (2019). Exploring marketing strategy as a catalyst for
performance in Nigerian telecommunication industry. IJMBS 2(4), 65 – 71
Azadi, S., & Rahimzadeh, S. (2018). A meta-analysis of personal selling elasticities.
Marketing Science Institute Working Paper Series, 1(08-001), 3-24.
Campbell-Hunt, C. (2020). What have we learned about generic competitive strategy? A 
meta analysis. Strategic Management Journal, 21(2), 127-154.
Chiliya, N, Herbst, G, and Roberts- Combard, M (2019). The impact of marketing 
strategies on profitability ofsmall grocery shops in South African Townships. African 
Journal of Business Management 3(3), 70 – 79
Dzisi, S., & Ofosu, D. (2014). Marketing strategies and the performance of SMEs in Ghana.
European Journal of Business and Management, 6(5), 102 – 111
Kazem, A., and Heijden, B. V. D. (2016). Exporting firms‟ strategic choices: the case of 
Egyptian SEMs in the food industry. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 71(3), 
21-33.
Kenu, A. Z. (2019). Effect of Marketing Mix Strategy on Performance of SMEs Evidence 
from Selected Manufacturing Enterprises in Southern Region, Ethiopia. International 
Journal of Science and Research (IJSR). 8(12), 1129 -1133
Liu, H., & Yang, L. (2014). Influence of marketing strategy on NPD performance: Role of 
customer perceived value and product characteristics. Journal of Social Sciences, 2, 
34-38.
Mohammadzadeh, M., Aarabi, S. M., & Salamzadeh, J. (2018). Organizational 
performance, marketing strategy, and financial strategic alignment: An empirical 
study of Iranian pharmaceutical firms. DARU Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
21(65), 1-7.
Owomoyela, S.K, Oyeniyi, K.O. and Ola, O.S, (2018).Investigating the impact of 
marketing mix elements on consumer loyalty: An empirical study on Nigerian 
Breweries Plc. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in Business. 4 
(11), 485 –496
Shane, S. F. (2019). Strategy type and performance: The influence of sales force 
management. Strategic Management Journal, 21(8), 813-829.
11
CHAPTER TWO 
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.0 Preamble
This chapter discusses the literature review and theory on the subject matter of this 
research to show better knowledge and understanding of existing literature that relates 
to the topic. The theories and literatures used in this work helps to buttress more on the 
component that makes up the topic and subject matter addressed in this research.
2.1 Conceptual Framework
2.1.1 Overview of Sales Strategy
Cespedes & Thompson (2019) conceptualized sales strategy as consisting of customer 
segmentation, customer prioritization, relationship strategies and sales processes and 
the use of multiple sales channels.
Sales strategy has been defined as “the extent to which a firm engages in a set of 
activities and decisions regarding the allocation of scarce sales resources (i.e. people, 
selling effort, money) to manage customer relationships on the basis of the value of 
each customer to the firm” (Panagopoulos and Avlonitis 2018). Based on their 
definition, sales strategy is the approach that a sales organization or an individual 
salesperson uses to differentially allocate resources among different customers based 
on the organizations or salesperson’s perceptions of the profitability of each customer 
or potential customer.
Sales strategy is distinct from marketing strategy in that sales strategy is concerned with 
how an organization’s sales force chooses to interact with individual customers in a 
targeted marketsegment, while marketing strategy is primarily concerned with tailoring 
marketing mix elements to meet the needs and wants of customers in targeted market 
segments (Panagopoulos and Avlonitis 2018).
A sales strategy is a process or a plan to achieve sales goals. Sales strategies are often 
based on the marketing strategy, but sometimes they will be different and must focus 
on whatever the company needs in order to generate revenue.
12
Sales strategy is defined as an approach to selling which allows the sales team of an 
organization to position the company and its products to the customers in a 
differentiated and more meaningful way. Many strategies have an in-depth line of best 
practices as well as processes that are given by management. Borg, & Louise Young 
(2019).
Sales strategy is considered as a thought process that will help a lot of businesses in 
increasing their sales. It will introduce you to many problem areas and depict the route 
that is needed to take the desired outcome. Correct salesstrategies can complement your 
sales efforts and are your journey so that you can reach your goals quickly.
When a company is developing its sales plan, sales strategies are important to consider. 
A sales strategy considers the product and/or services a company offers and determines 
the best steps to take to reach potential customers and increase sales.
Let's say you're creating a sales strategy for an energy drink company. Your company 
is planning to sell five different drinks, and you want to create a plan for selling the 
drinks next year. There are several things you must consider, including who your target 
market is, how you will sell the drinks, and what sales activities you will employ to 
reach your sales goals.
2.1.2 Dimensions of Sales Strategies 
Customer segmentation
One of the dimensions of sales strategy is customer segmentation which is premised on 
the idea that customers are different and although they may purchase similar products 
and services, the benefits they seek from the products and services they purchase often 
differ (Homburg, Schäfer, Schneider 2018). Therefore, customer segmentation is the 
process of identifying groups of customers who have similar wants and needs, 
identifying individual customers within each targeted market segment and precisely 
tailoring sales efforts to meet the needs of targeted customers.
Customer segmentation can impact salesperson performance when it leads to more 
precise targeting of potential customers that can result in higher revenues and customer 
responsiveness to the salesperson’s selling efforts (Zeitham, Rust and Lemon 2016).
13
Criteria that can be utilized to segment customers include customer buying behavior, 
customer lifetime value and customer profitability (Panagopoulos and Avlonitis 2018). 
Customer prioritization
Customer prioritization is another dimension of sales strategy and it allows sales 
organizations and salespeople to increase customer profitability by strengthening the 
selling firm’s relationship with their important customers while not negatively affecting 
the firm’s relationship with less important customers and can also lead to a reduction in 
sales and marketing costs (Homburg, Droll and Totzek 2018). Customer prioritization 
is the extent to which a firm’s important customers receive preferential treatment when 
compared to less important customers in the areas of product, pricing, sales, service, 
and processes (Homburg et al. 2018). Customer prioritization can help salespeople in 
maximizing their performance by allowing them to more effectively allocate their 
scarce sales resources such as time available to meet with customers based on the 
customer’s potential value to the firm (Terho et al. 2018).
Selling models
A third dimension of sales strategy is selling models which is based on the realization 
that different customers have different relationship objectives when interacting with 
suppliers with some customers preferring simple transactional exchanges with minimal 
relationship expectations, to buyers with complex requirements who expect 
collaborative relationships with suppliers (Ingram, LaForge and Leigh 2017; 
Panagopoulos and Avlonitis 2018). When salespeople match their selling efforts to the 
relationship expectations of customers, it should increase the likelihood of salespeople 
having successful interactions with customers which in turn should have a positive 
effect on salesperson performance (LaForge et al., 2019; Panagopoulos and Avlonitis 
2018).
Multiple sales channels
Finally, the fourth dimension refers to the systematic usage of multiple sales channels 
(e.g., sales force, distributors, direct mail, toll-free numbers, telemarketing, and the
14
Internet) that firms employ to conduct the sales, distribution, and service activities that 
are essential if they are to meet customers’ needs (Jindal, Reinartz, Krafft, & Hoyer, 
2017). Clearly, firms can vary greatly with respect to the degree of utilization of the 
various channels for the purpose of serving their customers. It is therefore appropriate 
to conceptualize the “use of multiple sales channels” dimension as one of degree rather 
than as being either present or absent. Consistent with our definition of sales strategy, 
firms extensively use multiple sales channels in order to more effectively allocate 
resources across customers of different value (e.g., Smith, Gopalakrishna, & Smith, 
2017). Accordingly, the firms that are making a restrictive use of a limited number of 
sales channels may not be able to allocate resources in an efficient manner which is the 
core pillar of sales strategy.
2.1.3 Sales Strategy and the Sales Process
The sales process is one of the foundational paradigms in personal selling in both the 
practitioner (Richmond 2018) and academic literature and is conceptualized as a series 
of events or steps that a salesperson takes to sell a product or service (Moncrief and 
Marshall 2017). The sales process is widely considered to consist of seven steps which 
include; prospecting and qualifying, pre-approach, approach, presentation, overcoming 
objections, close and follow-up. Although the “seven steps of selling” has evolved over 
the years to incorporate the trend towards relationship marketing (Moncrief and 
Marshall 2015), the role of the Internet (Long, Tellefsen and Lichtenthal 2017), selling 
from a network perspective (Borg and Young 2018) and the role of social media in the 
sales process (Andzulis, Panagopoulos and Rapp 2018), the basic framework of the 
seven steps of selling or some version of it is still being used as a sales process in many 
sales organizations today (CSO Insights 2015).
Sales strategy can affect how salespeople implement almost every stage of the selling 
process. For example, during the prospecting stage, salespeople attempt to identify 
likely prospects for the products and services that the salesperson is selling. During this 
stage, salespeople can use customer segmentation to segment their prospect list into 
prospective customers with similar needs. In the pre-approach stage, a salesperson
15
gathers information on prospects from company resources and external resources such 
as the prospective customer’s website, LinkedIn.com or Hoovers.com. Salespeople can 
also gather information on the industries their prospects are in and use that information 
to craft a selling approach for each prospective customer. When this stage is paired with 
sales strategy, a salesperson will decide how to prioritize among his or her prospects 
based on the salesperson assessment of the potential value that each prospect represents. 
During the approach stage of the sales process when typically, the salesperson first 
meets with the prospect, the salesperson attempts to conduct a needs assessment to 
determine how the salesperson’s offerings may be able to meet the prospective 
customer’s needs. Based on feedback received from the customer, the salesperson then 
proceeds to the presentation stage where the salesperson develops a solution that he or 
she then presents to the customer about how the proposed solution would be able to 
meet the client’s expressed needs. In both the approach and presentation stages, sales 
strategy can increase how effective salespeople are during both stages. When 
salespeople practice customer segmentation, customer prioritization and the use of 
selling models, they gain an understanding of what drives customer value for each 
customer segment.
Customer prioritization can help salespeople know whether an enterprise selling 
approach, a consultative selling approach or a transactional selling approach is required 
for each prospective customer. Selling models can assist salespeople in optimizing their 
time by tailoring their interactions with prospective customers based on customer 
preferences. For example, some customers may not want to meet with or have time to 
meet with salespeople, while other prospects may want other individuals from the 
selling firm such as sales engineers or sales managers to be a part of any meeting. In 
such situations, the salesperson can adapt their approach to suit the needs of the 
customer and can use a phone call, an online meeting through a platform such as 
Webex.com or an in-person visit.
The use of sales strategy can also benefit salespeople during the overcoming objections 
and closing stages of the sales process. When salespeople use the sales strategy of 
customer segmentation, they are likely to understand the issues associated with a
16
particular customer segment and thereby will be able to anticipate objections that an 
individual customer that is part of that customer segment may raise. In such situations, 
the salesperson will have a ready response to the prospect’s objections and should be 
able to allay the prospect’s concerns by demonstrating his knowledge of the prospect’s 
industry and how the salesperson’s products and services benefited other customers in 
the prospect’s industry.
During the closing stage, the salesperson may be able to reference other customers who 
are in the same customer segment as the prospective customer and use them as an 
example of a similar buyer who were satisfied with the salesperson’s products and 
services. The use of references of companies that are similar to the prospective buyer 
can help the salesperson close the sale. Finally, in the follow-up stage of the sales 
process, customer prioritization and selling models can inform how a salesperson 
follows up with customers. Salespeople can manage an ongoing relationship with a 
customer based on the lifetime value of the customer and the relationship objectives of 
each customer which is consistent with the notion of customer prioritization and selling 
models.
2.1.4 Types of Sales Strategies:
Inbound Sales Strategy
An inbound business sales strategy relies on catering the sales process to buyer actions. 
It prioritizes customers’ interests, pain points, needs, and goals.
Sales reps that use an inbound sample sales strategy don’t try to push prospects to make 
a decision to purchase. Instead, they focus on creating a personalized sales approach 
that’s tailored to each specific prospect.
This usually involves informing, educating, and nurturing prospects through the 
decision-making process.
Companies that take an inbound approach to sales have automated ways of capturing 
buyer and seller data and monitoring their pipeline, and strive to integrate their 
marketing and sales teams to create a seamless buying experience.
17
These companies have a sales process that supports prospects throughout their customer 
journey. They participate in online conversations with potential buyers and offer 
personalized advice.
Outbound Sales Strategy
Outbound sales strategies are based on seller actions. It takes advantage of tactics such 
as cold calling and cold emailing to spread the message about a company’s product or 
service to a large number of people.
If you’re using an outbound sample sales strategy, you’re contacting leads instead of 
having them come to you. This is the main difference between inbound and outbound 
sales.
Companies that use an outbound sales strategy usually rely on manual data entry to 
keep track of their pipeline, and have sales and marketing teams that work 
independently.
The main advantage of an outbound sales strategy is that it provides immediate 
feedback and results. It’s also easier to scale compared to an inbound strategy – once 
you find what’s working, you just reach out to more prospects.
Successful B2B companies understand that both inbound and outbound sales strategies 
have their pros and cons. That’s why as much as 84% of them use a mix of both to reach 
their business goals.
Looking to know where to start when it comes to developing a sales strategy? Today, 
we’re going to explore seven key steps and sales and marketing strategy example you 
need to understand to learn how to write a sales strategy document, so you can plan, 
aim and fire to propel yourself to success.
2.1.5 Benefits of Sales Strategies
Address all your customers’ needs — Customers have different needs depending on 
where they are in their sales journey.
While new customers might need to be educated on your products and its features, 
existing customers will need technical support and other forms of assistance. Knowing 
how to build sales strategy templates allows you to address your customers’ needs at 
every stage of the sales journey.
18
Improve your sales team’s ROI — Creating sales strategy templates forces you to 
take a closer look at what you’re already doing, which gives you the opportunity to gain 
a greater understanding of which sales tactics are working for you, and which tactics 
you should abandon. This, in turn, will allow you to maximize your results and improve 
your sales team’s ROI.
Hire the right people — Having the right people on your sales team is crucial if you 
want your business to grow. Defining a sales strategy will allow you to choose exactly 
the right people that can help you achieve your sales goals.
Creating a sales strategy will allow you to understand your target market better, as well 
as the reasons why your target audience should be buying from you. A good sales 
strategy should also address your unique selling points and all the ways you can 
communicate value.
2.1.6 Elements of an Effective Sales Strategy
One of the first steps in creating an effective sales plan is organizing your sales team. 
First, you'll need to determine the type of sales force. Do you want internal sales people 
or independent representatives?
Internal sales people are employees of the company and focus exclusively on growing 
the sales for their employer.
Independent representatives are contractors who work for themselves. They might 
work for additional companies and sell multiple products.
Because you want to grow your drink business and reach the right customers, you 
decide you need a mix of internal and independent sales people. The internal employees 
will actively seek out independent stores, regional distribution, and lower-volume 
accounts. The independent representatives will reach the larger, national accounts that 
they already have relationships with. Additionally, the independent representatives will 
help grow the industry contacts for your company, since many independent 
representatives know key buyers and can introduce you to important people.
2.1.7 Sales Strategy and Organizational Performance
In line with previous research (Panagopoulos & Avlonitis, 2018), we consider 
organizational performance as a key consequence of sales strategy. We define
19
organizational performance as a firm’s performance in terms of the development of the 
number of products or services sold, which in turn is captured by customer loyalty, the 
acquisition of new customers, and the achievement of the desired market share and 
growth rate (Homburg, Klarmann & Schmitt, 2019). Sales strategy requires firms to 
engage in segmenting and prioritizing customers, as well as in developing different 
selling models to reach each customer.
Performing these activities enables firms to efficiently allocate resources across 
different customers so that they can effectively interact with and relate to their 
customers. More specifically, segmentation should help firms’ sales forces to better 
understand and identify customers with different types of business needs and to align 
their sales approaches accordingly. Prioritization helps salespeople to allocate their 
limited resources more effectively to customers according to the value they represent 
for the selling firm. It should also have a positive overall effect on customers as studies 
have shown that prioritization increasesthe satisfaction and loyalty of top tier customers 
while not having any harmful effects on the satisfaction of lower tier customers.
Finally, specific selling models, ranging from transactional to collaborative modes, 
should enable salespeople to effectively match their selling approach with customers 
and therefore to help develop long-lasting relationships, which is generally considered 
to be related to superior sales force performance. In sum, sales strategy help firms in 
efficient and effective resource allocation and customer interactions, which in turn 
should be related to superior market performance.
2.2 Theoretical Framework 
Open system theory
Open system theory is the concept where the organizations are heavily influenced by 
their environment, which consists of various forces of economic, political and social 
nature. Essential resources are provided with the environmental surroundings that 
sustaining the organizational and lead to change the survival. This system was 
developed after World War 2 by a reaction to former theories of the organization like 
the human relation perspective of Elton Mayo and administrative opinions of Henri
20
Fayol which treated the organization primarily as a self-contained entity. In the Open 
system, any variation in any element of the system makes a variation in any other 
method (Scott & Davis, 2015). Ludwig Von Bertalanffy initially advanced this concept 
general ofsystem theory in 1940 which did not pick up till the1960s, which differentiate 
between open and close system. This theory will help in gathering competitive 
intelligence which will assist the organization in out doing the other media houses in 
the market.
Porter's theory of competitive advantage
Porter's theory of competitive advantage which identifies five competitive forces which 
include Competition in the industry, Potential new entrants, power of suppliers, power 
of the buyers and threat of substitute products. He indicated that the key of competitive 
strategy for an organizational unit in an industry is to find a level in the paly ground of 
industry where business can defend itself to the best position against these competitive 
forces or can influence them into their advantage (Porter, 2011). The importance of 
structuring the competitive strategy is to relate the organization with its surrounding. 
Understanding of these bottom-line sources of competition pressure highlights the 
fundamental strength and weakness of an organization, animate its positioning in the 
market, correct the areas where the market highlights to have the most significant 
importance as compared to the threat it holds. (Zecchini, 2013) To sustain competitive 
advantages, firms should consider emphases in creating value for customers which are 
only possible by responding with faster answers to the ever-developing organization 
environment driven mainly by technological changes. Porter did not include technology 
and the government as forces that influence competition market, which can be 
understood in isolation of the five forces. (Porter, 2011)
Push and Pull Theory
This theory of push and pull are two theories in one. The genesis of the term push and 
pull was in the logistics and supply chain management even though it has widely used 
in marketing Push or pulls explained whether the organization initiates its activity,
21
(Mellor & Hao, 2014). Fredrick Winslow Taylor formulated the push and pull theory 
in 1911 in his book "The principle of scientific management." Firms adopted his ideas 
by focusing on being more efficient than their competitors by looking into the needs of 
the potential clients and pushing on what will satisfy their needs. Push and pull 
marketing differ in a situation where the consumers approached. In push marketing, a 
promotional strategy used where organizations tend to take their brands to consumers. 
In pull marketing, the idea behind is getting customer coming by developing loyalty, 
positioning and differentiating a brand in the market compared to that of the competitor. 
It has done through the mass media promotion, for instance, when a media house has 
road-shows to a particular region. Most organizations are moving from push theory to 
pull theory since it providing the solution and information in a widely accessible manner 
and allowing the consumers to adapt to what will hugely satisfying their needs and 
wants. An organization can prepare the answer ahead of time as an assumption of push 
solution since they can anticipate the needs of the consumers in advance (Cooper, 2019) 
For the organization to increase efficiency it emphasis more on the pull theory. Because 
if they create the penultimate user manual that will cater to all the questions the 
consumer may need; it will reduce the contact which the customer may need to do to 
the organization. Moreover, emphases on training customer support will be required. 
Most organization have adopted the pulling solution(Harding, 2017).
2.3 Empirical Review
Sinha & Mukherjee (2020), examined different sales strategies used in banks and to 
investigate the perceptual gap between employees and customers towards different 
sales strategies. Empirical study has been conducted among select private sector banks 
in the Barak valley region of Indian state of Assam. Perceptual gap has been analysed 
by estimating significance difference between two sample mean. Findings revealed that 
there is a significance difference between perception between employees and customers 
towards up-selling strategy whereas there is no such difference in case of other sales 
strategies. Study found that unique nature of the up selling strategy is responsible for 
creating such differences in perception. This study cannot be generalised in case of
22
entire Indian banking industry as it focused only on the sales strategies of private sector 
banks in India. Findings help the banks to understand the gap between the thinking of 
employees and customers towards the importance of different sales strategies.
Maroofi, Ardalan and Tabarzadi (2017), investigated the sales strategies in the financial 
performance of insurance companies in the Kurdistan province. The data were collected 
by the questionnaires, and analyzed. The reliability of the questionnaires was analyzed 
using Cronbach's alpha coefficient, which were 864/0 and 873/0 for the questionnaire 
of sales strategy and sales performance respectively. All hypotheses were confirmed in 
the 05/0 reliability and the results showed that the sales strategy has a significant impact 
on the performance. The relationship between the insurance companies and sales 
strategies (direct and indirect sales) performance (customer satisfaction and return on 
total assets) was significant approved. The correlation coefficients were 0.906, 0.939, 
0.942 and 0.894.
Terho, Eggert, Haas & Ulaga, (2017), examined how sales strategy translates into 
performance. The role of selling has become increasingly analytical and it is a central 
topic on senior management's agenda in business markets. Still, sales strategy remains 
an under-researched topic in the business-to-business marketing domain. very little is 
known about how to implement it effectively or about the mechanisms of how sales 
strategy affects performance, despite its apparent importance for firm success. Drawing 
on a large-scale sample of 816 salespeople and directors from 30 sales organizations, 
and employing multilevel structural equation modeling, this study sheds light on the 
chain of effects that transforms sales strategy as an organizational variable into selling 
performance captured on the individual salesperson level. The findings demonstrate 
that a firm's sales strategy is related to market performance and affects salesperson 
selling performance both directly and indirectly. Further, the results show that each 
sales strategy dimension affects salesperson performance in a unique way. Of the three 
dimensions of sales strategy studied, only segmentation directly impacts salesperson 
selling performance. Prioritization and selling models impact salesperson performance 
indirectly, via their impact on customer orientation and value-based selling. These
23
results lead to actionable implications for the effective implementation of sales strategy 
in business markets.
24
REFERENCES
Andzulis, J, Nikolaos G. Panagopoulos, & Adam, R. (2018), "A Review of Social 
Media and Implications for the Sales Process," Journal of Personal Selling & 
Sales Management, 32 305-16.
Borg, Susanne W. and Louise Young (2019), "Continuing the Evolution of the Selling 
Process: A Multi-Level Perspective," Industrial Marketing Management, 43 
543-52.
Cespedes, F., & Thompson, S. (2019). Don't turn your sales team loose without a 
strategy. Harvard Business Review Online, Retrieved from 
https://hbr.org/2021/12/dont-turn-yoursales-team-loose-without-a-strategy.
CSO Insights (2015),” Sales Management Optimization Study – 2015 Key Trends 
Analysis” Boulder, CO.
Homburg, C., Schäfer, H., & Schneider, J. (2018). Customer Prioritization: Does it Pay 
Off, and how should it be Implemented?" Journal of Marketing, 72 110-30
Ingram, Thomas N., Raymond W. LaForge, & Thomas W. Leigh (2017), "Selling in 
the New Millennium: A Joint Agenda," Industrial Marketing Management, 31 
559-67
LaForge, R. W., Ingram, T. N., & Cravens, D. W. (2019). Strategic alignment for sales 
organization transformation. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 17(3-4), 199-219.
Panagopoulos, N. G., & Avlonitis, G. J. (2018). Performance implications of sales 
strategy: The moderating effects of leadership and environment. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 27(1), 46-57.
Richmond, K. (2018), “Powerful Selling” (accessed April 10th 2022), Retrieved from 
http://2022books.lardbucket.org/pdfs/powerful-selling.pdf.
Terho, H., Eggert, A., Haas, A., & Ulaga, W. (2018). How sales strategy translates into 
performance: The role of salesperson customer orientation and value-based 
selling. Industrial Marketing Management, 45, 12-21.
Zeithaml, Valarie A., Roland T. Rust, & Katherine N. Lemon (2016), "The Customer 
Pyramid: Creating and Serving Profitable Customers," California Management 
Review, 43 118-42.
25
3.0 Preamble
CHAPTER THREE 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This chapter highlights research methodology that has been used in the study. It 
gives an overview of research design, population and sample size, sampling 
techniques, data collection and data analysis that were used in the research.
3.1 Research design
According to Zikmund (2012), a research design is a framework that is used by 
researchers to conduct research. This research framework includes the 
procedures as well as the procedural framework necessary for obtaining the data 
and information needed to structure and solve a research problem. The study 
used a descriptive research design.
According to Sekaran and Bougie (2013), descriptive research is a design used 
to answer the what, how and why. Descriptive design was appropriate for this 
study because it enabled collection of data by measurement of central tendency, 
variation and correlation (Shajahan, 2008). Cooper and Schindler (2011) stated 
that descriptive studies help a researcher discover association between variables. 
The research used quantitative research to gain better knowledge and 
understanding of the results.
3.2 Study Population
The study population for this study are 102 staff at the marketing and sales 
department of AIICO Insurance Plc, Lagos, Nigeria.
3.3. Sample size and sampling techniques
According to Polit (2008), a sample size is a proportion of a population. Tustin, 
Ligthelm and Van (2005), state that sample size is a smaller set of the larger 
population. Simple random sampling technique was adopted. Use of a sample
26
enables a researcher to save time and money hence get more detained 
information for its respondents.
n = N
1 + N (e)2
Parametersinclude:
n = required response/sample size 
e = error limit
N = population size = 102
Substituting the information in the formula at 95% confidence level and an error
limit of 5% result in:
n = 102
1 + 102 (0.05)2
Therefore, n= 83
Hence, the sample size is Seventy (83) staff from the AIICO Plc Lagos,
3.4. Description of data collection instrument
Questionnaires were administered for data collection. They were dropped and 
picked immediately respondents were done answering. Ample time was given to 
respondents to answer the questionnaire. Respondents were also informed that 
information received was confidential and was only used for academic purpose.
According to Mugenda and Mugenda (2003), reliability is a measure of the 
degree to which a research instrument yieldsreliable results or data after repeated 
trials. Questionnaire instrument is reliable when it can measure a variable 
accurately and obtain the same results over a period of time. The questionnaire 
was in two sections (Section A, Bio-data,) and (Section B, Research questions). 
While the Likert type scales was (Strongly Agree =SA, Agree=A, Undecided= 
U, Disagree=D, Strongly Disagree= SD).
27
3.5 Validity and Reliability Test
To forestall measurement of errors which occur when the research instrument is 
faulty, the reliability of the research instrument was ensured through its careful 
construction and pre-test. A pre-test was done by conducting a pilot survey, wherein 
the research instruments (questionnaires) were administered to a part (sample) of 
the population, with view to finding possible fault and thereafter, correcting them 
before the full administration to the main sample for the study.
3.6. Statistical analysis and procedures
The statistical technique that was used for the study was the Statistical Package 
for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 23. Frequency count and percentage were 
used to analyze the descriptive data while Pearson correlation coefficient 
analysis was used to test the hypotheses of the study.
3.7 Limitations of research methodology
The following are the factors that may be encounter during the research 
methodology
1. Formulation of research aims and objectives. You might have formulated 
research aims and objectives too broadly. You can specify in which ways the 
formulation of research aims and objectives could be narrowed so that the level 
of focus of the study could be increased.
2. Implementation of data collection method. Because you do not have an 
extensive experience in primary data collection (otherwise you would not be 
reading this book), there is a great chance that the nature of implementation of 
data collection method is flawed.
3. Sample size. Sample size depends on the nature of the research problem. If 
sample size is too small, statistical tests would not be able to identify significant 
relationships within data set. You can state that basing your study in larger 
sample size could have generated more accurate results. The importance of 
sample size is greater in quantitative studies compared to qualitative studies.
28
REFERENCES
Cooper, D., & Schindler, P. (2008). Business Research Methods. (10th ed.) . NewYork,
NY : Mcgraw-Hill.
Mugenda, O., & Mugenda, G. (2003). Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches. Nairobi: Acts Press.
Polit, D. (2008). Essentials of Nursing Research: Methods, Appraisal and Utilization. 5th 
Ed. New York, New York: Lippincott.
Sekaran, U., & Bougie, R. (2010). Research Methods for Business: A Skill-Building 
Approach. London, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Shajahan, S. (2008). Marketing Reasearch Concepts & Practices in India, Macmillan.
Tustin, D., H., Ligthelm, A. A., & Van Week, H. D. J. (2005). Marketing research in 
practice. Pretoria, South Africa: Unisa Press.
Zikmund, W., & Babin, B. (2012). Business Research Methods: London, UK: Cengage
Learning.
29
CHAPTER FOUR
DATA ANALYSIS AND PRESENTATION
4.0 Preamble
This chapter focuses on the analysis and interpretation of data from the various 
sources, essentially through questionnaire and field survey. Frequency count and 
percentage were used to analyze the descriptive data while Pearson correlation 
coefficient and multiple regression analysis was used to test the hypotheses of the 
study.
4.1 Respondents characteristics and classification
Table: 4.1 Analysis of questionnaire distribution and retrieval.
Code Variables Frequency Percentage (%)
1 Questionnaire 
Retrieved
74 89.2%
2 Questionnaire not 
retrieved
9 10.8%
Total 83 100
Source: Field study (2022).
The Table 4.1 above shows that 74 copies of questionnaire were retrieved out of 83 
copies that were distributed. This represents 89.2% retrieval rate.
Table 4.2 Gender distribution of the respondents
Frequency Percent
Cumulative 
Percent
Valid Male 41 55.4 55.4
Female 33 44.6 100.0
Total 74 100.0
30
Source: Field study (2022).
The tables show that 41 respondents, representing 55.4% were male while 33 
respondents, representing 44.6% were female. It can be deduced that majority of the 
respondents were male.
Table 4.3 Age Distribution of the respondents
Frequency Percent
Cumulative 
Percent
Valid Below 20 years 11 14.8 14.8
21-30 years 25 33.8 48.6
31-40 Years 25 33.8 82.4
41-50 years 5 6.8 89.2
51 years and 
above 8 10.8 100.0
Total 74 100.0
Source: Field study (2022).
The table shows that 11 respondents, representing 14.8% were below 20 years of 
age, 25 respondents, representing 33.8% were between 21-30 years of age, 25 
respondents, representing 33.8% were between 31-40 years of age, 5 respondents, 
representing 6.8% were between 41-50 years of age, and 8 respondents, representing 
10.8% were above 51. It can be deduced that majority of the respondents were 
within 21-30 years and 31-40 years
Table 4.4 Marital status Distribution of the respondents
Frequency Percent
Cumulative
Percent
Valid Single 41 55.4 55.4
Married 31 41.9 97.3
Divorced 2 2.7 100.0
Total 74 100.0
Source: Field study (2022).
31
The table shows that 41 respondents, representing 55.4% were single, 31 
respondents, representing 41.9% were married, one respondent, representing 2.7% 
were divorced. It can be deduced that majority of the respondents were single.
Table 4.5 Academic Qualification Distribution of the respondents
Frequenc
y Percent
Cumulative
Percent
Valid SSCE/ NECO/ GCE/ 
NABTEB 18 24.3 24.3
ND/NCE 23 31.1 55.4
HND/BSC/BA/B.Ed 24 32.4 87.8
MSC/MBA/MA/M.E
d/MPA 9 12.2 100.0
Total 74 100.0
Source: Field study (2022).
The table shows that 18 respondents, representing 24.3% were SSCE/NECO/GCE/ 
NABTEB holders, 23 respondents, representing 31.1% were ND/NCE holders, 24 
respondents, representing 32.4% were HND/BSC/BA/B.Ed holders, nine 
respondents, representing 12.2% were MSC/MBA/MA/M.Ed/MPA holders. It can 
be deduced that majority of the respondents were HND/BSC/BA/B.Ed holders.
32
TABLE: 7
Statement 1: New and existing products can be sponsored customer segmentation to 
gain market acceptance/patronage.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 49 66.2
Agree 21 28.3
Undecided 2 2.7
Disagree 1 1.4
Strongly disagree 1 1.4
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
The table above shows that 66.2% of the respondents strongly agree with the statement, 
28.3% agrees, 2.7% undecided, 1.4% disagree, and 1.4% strongly disagree respectively 
with the statement above.
TABLE: 8
Statement 2: Customer segmentation can be used to influence the level of 
organizational sales turnover and profitability
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 34 45.9
Agree 28 37.9
Undecided - -
Disagree 6 8.1
Strongly disagree 6 8.1
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
The table shows that 45.9% of the respondents strongly agree, 37.9% agree, 0% undecided, 
8.1% disagree and 8.1% strongly disagree with the statement above.
33
TABLE: 9
Statement 3: New product emergence into the market can be introduced for market 
acceptance with the use of customer segmentation.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 45 60.8
Agree 24 32.4
Undecided 4 5.4
Disagree 1 1.4
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 60.8% of the respondent strongly agree, 32.4% agree, 5.4% undecided 
and 1.4% disagree with the statement above
TABLE: 10
Statement 4: A dying product or brand can be revived via customer segmentation
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 40 54.1
Agree 33 44.5
Undecided 1 1.4
Disagree - -
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
The table above shows that 54.1% of the respondents strongly agree, 44.5% agrees, 1.4% 
undecided with the statement above
34
TABLE: 11
Statement 5: Customer buying behaviour helps salesperson during customer 
segmentation
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 40 54.1%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 5 6.8%
Disagree 2 2.7%
Strongly disagree 1 1.4%
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 54.1% of the respondentsstrongly agree, 36.5% agree, 6.8% undecided, 
2.7% disagree, and 1.4% of the respondents strongly disagree with the statement above.
TABLE: 12
Statement 6: customer prioritization can be used to gain competitive edge
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 45 60.8%
Agree 24 32.4%
Undecided - -
Disagree 5 6.8%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 60.8% of the respondents strongly agree, 32.4% agree and 6.8% 
disagreed, with the statement above.
35
TABLE: 13
Statement 7: customer prioritization can be used to position an organizational product 
and image offerings in the minds of the target marketing.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 27 36.5%
Agree 41 55.4%
Undecided 4 5.4%
Disagree 2 2.7%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 36.5% of the respondents strongly agree, 55.4% agree , 5.4% were 
undecided and 2.7% disagree, with the statement.
TABLE: 14
Statement 8: high sales turnover and profitability can be achieved through customer 
prioritization
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 45 60.8%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 2 2.7%
Disagree - -
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 60.8% of the respondents strongly agree, 36.5% agree and 2.7% 
disagree, with the statement.
36
TABLE: 15
Statement 9: customer prioritization influences favorable attitudes from 
consumers towards organizations product or services.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 36 48.6%
Agree 30 40.5%
Undecided 4 5.4%
Disagree 4 5.4%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 48.6% of the respondents strongly agree, 40.5% agree, 5.4% 
Undecided and 5.4% disagree, with the statement.
TABLE: 16
Statement 10: customer prioritization help to build better relationship between 
selling organization and the buyer
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 34 45.9%
Agree 33 44.6%
Undecided 2 2.7%
Disagree 5 6.8%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 45.9% of the respondents strongly agree, 44.6% agree, 2.7% 
Undecided and 6.8% disagree, with the statement above
37
TABLE: 17
Statement 11: sales model can be used to build and maintain organizational corporate 
image and identify.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 36 48.6%
Agree 23 31.1%
Undecided 9 12.2%
Disagree 6 8.1%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 48.6% of the respondents strongly agree, 31.1% agree, 12.2% 
Undecided and 8.1% disagree, with the statement above
TABLE: 18
Statement 12: Efficient and effective use of sales model will enhance organizational; 
sales turnover, profitability and edge-out competition.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 37 50%
Agree 34 45.9%
Undecided 3 4.1%
Disagree - -
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 50% of the respondents strongly agree, 45.9% agree, 4.1% Undecided 
and 0% disagree, with the statement above
38
TABLE: 19
Statement 13: New or existing product may fail because of poor or wrong selling model 
adoption.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 28 37.8%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 10 13.5%
Disagree 9 12.2%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 37.8% of the respondents strongly agree, 36.5% agree, 13.5% 
Undecided and 12.2% disagree, with the statement above
TABLE: 20
Statement 14: There is significant relationship between multiple sales channels 
and improved sale performance of an organization
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 34 45.9%
Agree 33 44.6%
Undecided 2 2.7%
Disagree 5 6.8%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 45.9% of the respondents strongly agree, 44.6% agree, 2.7% Undecided, 
6.8% disagree and 0% Strongly disagree with the statement above
39
TABLE: 21
Statement 15: selling model helps salesperson to achieve customer retention
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 40 54.1%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 5 6.8%
Disagree 2 2.7%
Strongly disagree 1 1.4%
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 54.1% of the respondents strongly agree, 36.5% agree, 6.8% 
were undecided, 2.7% disagreed and 1.4% strongly disagree with the statement 
above
TABLE: 22
Statement 16: multiple sales channels improve organizational profitability
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 37 52.86%
Agree 30 42.86%
Undecided - -
Disagree 2 2.86%
Strongly disagree 1 1.43%
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 52.86% of the respondents strongly agree, 42.86% agree, 2.86% 
disagree and 1.43% Strongly disagree with the statement above
40
TABLE: 23
Statement 17: Adoption of multiple sales channels helps to create brand awareness
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 45 60.8%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 2 2.7%
Disagree - -
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 60.8% of the respondents strongly agree, 36.5% agree, 2.7% 
Undecided with the statement above
TABLE: 24
Statement 18: multiple sales channels help organization to reach potential customers and 
increase sales
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 36 48.6%
Agree 23 31.1%
Undecided 9 12.2%
Disagree 6 8.1%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 36 48.6%
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 48.6% of the respondents strongly agree, 31.1% agree, 12.2% were 
undecided and 8.1% disagree with the statement above
41
TABLE: 25
Statement 19: Adoption of multiple sales channels leads to customer satisfaction
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 40 54.1%
Agree 27 36.5%
Undecided 5 6.8%
Disagree 2 2.7%
Strongly disagree 1 1.4%
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 54.1% of the respondents strongly agree, 36.5% agree, 6.8% 
undecided, 2.7% Disagree, and 1.4% Strongly disagree with the statement above
TABLE: 26
Statement 20: Efficient and effective use of multiple sales channels will enhance 
organizational competitiveness.
VARIABLE FREQUENCY PERCENTAGE
Strongly agree 34 45.9%
Agree 33 44.6%
Undecided 2 2.7%
Disagree 5 6.8%
Strongly disagree - -
Total 74 100
Source: Questionnaire administered (Field survey 2022)
In the table above, 45.9% of the respondents strongly agree, 44.6% agree, 2.7%
undecided, 6.8% Disagree, and 0% strongly disagreed with the statement above.
42
4.2 Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis 1
H0: Customer segmentation does not influence the organizational performance
Hi: Customer segmentation influence organizational performance
Table 4.8 Correlations
Customer 
segmentation
organizationa
l 
performance
Customer 
segmentation
Pearson Correlation 1 .063
Sig. (2-tailed) .036
N 74 74
organizationa 
l performance
Pearson Correlation .063 1
Sig. (2-tailed) .036
N 74 74
Source: Field study (2022).
Interpretation
From the table of values above, the relationship between Customer segmentation 
and organizational performance is positive with a value of 0.063, indicating that 
Customer segmentation affects organizational performance. The probability value 
is 0.063 which is greater than 0.05 (r = .063, p<·05). Therefore, we accept 
alternative hypothesis and reject the null hypothesis.
43
Hypothesis 2
H0: There is no significant effect of Customer Prioritization on organization profitability
Hi: There is significant effect of Customer Prioritization on organization profitability
Table 4.9 Correlations
Customer
Prioritization
organization
profitability
Customer 
Prioritization
Pearson Correlation 1 .120
Sig. (2-tailed) .344
N 74 74
organization 
profitability
Pearson Correlation .120 1
Sig. (2-tailed) .344
N 74 74
Source: Field study (2022).
Interpretation
From the table of values above, the relationship between Customer Prioritization 
and organization profitability is positive with a value of 0.120, indicating that 
Customer Prioritization affect organization profitability. The probability value is
0.120 which is greater than 0.05 (r = .120, p<·05). Therefore, we accept alternative 
hypothesis and reject the null hypothesis.
44
Hypothesis 3
H0: sales model adoption does not have positive impact on company’s market share
Hi: sales model adoption has positive impact on company’s market share
Table 4.10 Correlations
sales model
company’s 
market share
sales model Pearson Correlation 1 .049
Sig. (2-tailed) .000
N 74 74
company’s 
marketshare
Pearson Correlation .049 1
Sig. (2-tailed) .000
N 74 74
Source: Field study (2022).
Interpretation
From the table of values above, the relationship between sales model and company’s 
market share is positive with a value of 0.049, indicating that sales model affects 
company’s market share. The probability value is 0.049 which is greater than 0.05 
(r = .049, p<·05). Therefore, we accept the alternative hypothesis and reject the null 
hypothesis.
45
Hypothesis 4
H0: There is no significant effect of multiple sales channels on organizational sales
performance
Hi: There is significant effect of multiple sales channels on organizational sales 
performance
Table 4.11 Correlations
multiple sales 
channels
organization
al sales 
performance
multiple sales 
channels
Pearson Correlation 1 .091
Sig. (2-tailed) .000
N 74 74
organizational 
sales 
performance
Pearson Correlation .091 1
Sig. (2-tailed) .000
N 74 74
Source: Field study (2022).
Interpretation
From the table of values above, the relationship between multiple sales channels 
and organizational sales performance is positive with a value of 0.091, indicating 
that multiple sales channels affects organizational sales performance. The 
probability value is 0.091 which is greater than 0.05 (r = .091, p<·05). Therefore, 
we accept the alternative hypothesis and reject the null hypothesis.
46
Table 4.6 Model Summary
Model R R Square
Adjusted R 
Square
Std. Error of the 
Estimate
1 .767a
.588 .560 1.252
a. Predictors: (Constant), customer segmentation, customer prioritization, 
selling model, multiple sales channels
Source: Field study (2022).
The findings on table 4.6 shows that the R square value is 0.588 which indicates 
that 58.8% of the variation in the dependent variable (organizational performance) 
is explained by the study variables while 41.2% is explained by other factors not 
considered by the study. The study also shows that the correlation coefficient value
(R) is 0.560, which indicates a strong relationship between the research variables.
Table 4.7 ANOVAa
Model
Sum of 
Squares df
Mean 
Square F Sig.
1 Regressio
n
131.881 2 32.970 21.017 .000b
Residual 92.556 71 1.569
Total 224.438 73
a. Dependent Variable: organizational performance
b. Predictors: (Constant), customer segmentation, customer prioritization, 
selling model, multiple sales channels
Source: Field study (2022).
47
The ANOVA results on table 4.7 shows that the regression model issignificant since 
the P – value 0.000<0.05 at 95% confidence level. This shows that the regression 
model is a good predictor of the variables.
Decision Rule
Significant level = 0.05
If p ≥ 0.05 test is significant (i.e. there is a significant relationship) 
If p ≤ 0.05 test is significant (i.e. there is no significant relationship)
4.3 Discussion of findings
In this study, Pearson correlation coefficient was used to determine whether sales 
strategy can be explained with customer segmentation, customer prioritization, 
selling model, multiple sales channels. The model was significant (p<.0005), 
indicating that the model is a good fit. These four dimensions give companies an 
apparatus for pursuing and crafting their sales strategies. Sales strategies have a 
positive influence on sales force and firm performance. Our study provides the 
empirical validation of this assertion by demonstrating that it really pays off, thereby 
elevating the importance of investing in marketing activities such as developing a 
sound sales strategy. Specifically, we found that sales strategy influences sales force 
performance dimensions and firm performance.
48
REFERENCES
Babbies, R.K. (2012). Case study research: Design and methods. Los Angeles: Nelson
Press
Ronald, B. (2014). Business Research Methods: London, UK: Cengage Learning.
49
CHAPTER FIVE
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
5.0 Preambles
This chapter contains summary of the findings, conclusion, recommendations, limitations 
of the study and suggestions for further studies.
5.1 Summary of findings
Taken together, the findings from our multilevel analyses lead to a set of actionable 
managerial implications. First, managersshould promote the acceptance of differentselling 
models within their organizations. Business markets are too heterogeneous to allow a “one size-fits-all” approach to selling. The findings indicate that the availability of different 
selling models strengthens the link between salespeople’s customer orientation and selling 
performance.
Second, our findings demonstrate that value-based selling is a desirable and important 
salesperson selling approach in business markets. Not only is value-based selling 
associated with salesperson performance but it also supports firms in capitalizing on their 
sales strategy and helps customer-oriented salespeople effectively translate their customer 
orientation into performance outcomes in business markets. To attain these goals, 
salespeople should receive training to improve their value-based selling capabilities.
Third, our findings call for action concerning the development of effective segmentation 
schemes in business markets. While segmentation is a fundamental concept of marketing 
theory, many firms in business markets still rely on generic typologies that are only loosely 
linked to customers’ heterogeneous needs and buying preferences. This impedes sales 
performance, and the development of more effective segmentations schemes should be 
high on managers’ agenda.
50
Overall, our findings highlight that sales strategy is a source of competitive advantage in 
business markets and that investments in sales strategy should pay off for firms.
5.2 Conclusion
Sales strategies of insurance companies have a significant impact on the organizational 
performance of insurance companies The results showed a significant correlation between 
the type of sales strategies of insurance companies (direct and indirect sales) with 
performance (customer satisfaction and return on total assets). The results showed 
significant levels of these variables was less than 0.05 and the correlation coefficients were 
0.906, 0.939, 0.942 and 0.894, respectively.
Sales strategy seems to have a rather modest direct impact on individual salesperson 
performance, it plays a vital role for business firms since it also affects salespeople’s 
performance indirectly by driving effective salesperson selling efforts and by helping 
salespeople become more effective in their sales work.
In conclusion, strategy and its effective implementation has been an important topic for 
scholars and practitioners. With the increased importance of the sales force to strategy 
implementation, identifying ways to increase alignment between the sales force and firm 
strategy has become a major concern of managers. This dissertation has shed some light 
on how that alignment can be achieved, which can help managers improve the performance 
of their sales organizations in an increasingly competitive and complex environment.
5.3 Recommendations
The following recommendations are therefore made:
i. companies must provide services to the questions and problems that people 
encounter and try to resolve them over time. This will ultimately increase the quality 
and performance of the company to increase sales.
51
ii. The company's marketing strategy must be consistent and in perfect harmony with 
sales strategy. Through strategic coordination between the two, sales performance 
can be increased.
iii. It is suggested that companies pay attention to the following issues in their 
marketing strategies: determining the scope for each product / market, qualitative 
and quantitative objectives for product / market, efficient allocation of resources 
between marketing activities, identifying the sources of competitive advantage and 
creating synergy.
iv. Sales and Marketing Manager continually observe and track the demand, 
competition and technological developments. This will yield improved sales to be 
always one step ahead of their rivals.
v. The trust of the people in the marketing strategy is the most important element of a 
culture of trust and communication support and if not, no company can have the 
desired result.
vi. Identifying customer needs and market opportunities do effective marketing 
research ahead of their competitors.
vii. Identifying the factors affecting the internal environment of the company's ability 
to increase profitability.
viii. The company's efforts to increase market share, because it is the leading cause of 
profitability.
ix. Managers should set the appropriate target market and tailor sales activities to suit 
the needs of each client. They should use specialist sales forces for each of the 
targeted customers.
x. Identifying customer needs by holding meetings with clients.
xi. Costs such as the cost of acquiring a part of the market and transportation costs also 
affect the selection of the target market
5.4 Limitations of the Study
The study examined only the effect of sales strategy on the organizational 
performance with reference to AIICO Insurance in Lagos State. The conclusion of
52
this study should be considered in the light of its limitations. First, the sample used 
was rather small; if we consider that the study covers other sectors of the economy. 
Second, the generalization of the results was rather limited due to the fact that the 
sample covers only the Insurance industry in Nigeria. Thirdly, there might be 
element of biasness in the information given by the respondents. Hence, the 
outcome remains valid.
5.5 Suggestion for further studies
Future research on sales strategy and its implementation should examine how salesperson 
implementation of customer segmentation, customer prioritization, and the use of selling 
models, impacts performance separately.
53
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Andzulis, J, Nikolaos G. Panagopoulos, & Adam, R. (2018), "A Review of Social 
Media and Implications for the Sales Process," Journal of Personal Selling & 
Sales Management, 32 305-16.
Aremu M.A and Lawal A.T, (2019). Exploring marketing strategy as a catalyst for 
performance in Nigerian telecommunication industry. IJMBS 2(4), 65 – 71
Azadi, S., & Rahimzadeh, S. (2018). A meta-analysis of personal selling elasticities.
Marketing Science Institute Working Paper Series, 1(08-001), 3-24.
Borg, Susanne W. and Louise Young (2019), "Continuing the Evolution of the Selling 
Process: A Multi-Level Perspective," Industrial Marketing Management, 43 
543-52.
Campbell-Hunt, C. (2020). What have we learned about generic competitive strategy? A 
meta analysis. Strategic Management Journal, 21(2), 127-154.
Cespedes, F., & Thompson, S. (2019). Don't turn your sales team loose without a 
strategy. Harvard Business Review Online, Retrieved from 
https://hbr.org/2021/12/dont-turn-yoursales-team-loose-without-a-strategy.
Chiliya, N, Herbst, G, and Roberts- Combard, M (2019). The impact of marketing 
strategies on profitability ofsmall grocery shops in South African Townships. African 
Journal of Business Management 3(3), 70 – 79
CSO Insights (2015),” Sales Management Optimization Study – 2015 Key Trends 
Analysis” Boulder, CO.
Dzisi, S., & Ofosu, D. (2014). Marketing strategies and the performance of SMEs in Ghana.
European Journal of Business and Management, 6(5), 102 – 111
Homburg, C., Schäfer, H., & Schneider, J. (2018). Customer Prioritization: Does it Pay 
Off, and how should it be Implemented?" Journal of Marketing, 72 110-30
Ingram, Thomas N., Raymond W. LaForge, & Thomas W. Leigh (2017), "Selling in 
the New Millennium: A Joint Agenda," Industrial Marketing Management, 31 
559-67
Kazem, A., and Heijden, B. V. D. (2016). Exporting firms‟ strategic choices: the case of 
Egyptian SEMs in the food industry. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 71(3), 
21-33.
54
Kenu, A. Z. (2019). Effect of Marketing Mix Strategy on Performance of SMEs Evidence 
from Selected Manufacturing Enterprises in Southern Region, Ethiopia. International 
Journal of Science and Research (IJSR). 8(12), 1129 -1133
LaForge, R. W., Ingram, T. N., & Cravens, D. W. (2019). Strategic alignment for sales 
organization transformation. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 17(3-4), 199-219.
Liu, H., & Yang, L. (2014). Influence of marketing strategy on NPD performance: Role of 
customer perceived value and product characteristics. Journal of Social Sciences, 2, 
34-38.
Mohammadzadeh, M., Aarabi, S. M., & Salamzadeh, J. (2018). Organizational 
performance, marketing strategy, and financial strategic alignment: An empirical 
study of Iranian pharmaceutical firms. DARU Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
21(65), 1-7.
Owomoyela, S.K, Oyeniyi, K.O. and Ola, O.S, (2018).Investigating the impact of 
marketing mix elements on consumer loyalty: An empirical study on Nigerian 
Breweries Plc. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in Business. 4 
(11), 485 –496
Panagopoulos, N. G., & Avlonitis, G. J. (2018). Performance implications of sales 
strategy: The moderating effects of leadership and environment. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 27(1), 46-57.
Richmond, K. (2018), “Powerful Selling” (accessed April 10th 2022), Retrieved from 
http://2022books.lardbucket.org/pdfs/powerful-selling.pdf.
Shane, S. F. (2019). Strategy type and performance: The influence of sales force 
management. Strategic Management Journal, 21(8), 813-829.
Terho, H., Eggert, A., Haas, A., & Ulaga, W. (2018). How sales strategy translates into 
performance: The role of salesperson customer orientation and value-based 
selling. Industrial Marketing Management, 45, 12-21.
Zeithaml, Valarie A., Roland T. Rust, & Katherine N. Lemon (2016), "The Customer 
Pyramid: Creating and Serving Profitable Customers," California Management 
Review, 43 118-42.
55
56
APPENDIX
Instruction: please mark ( ) in the appropriate box or boxes where possible, then 
comment where applicable.
PART A (BIO-DATA)
1. Sex
(i) Male ( )
(ii) Female ( )
2. Age
(i) Below 25years ( )
(ii) 26-30 years ( )
(iii) 31-40 years ( )
(iv) 41years and above ( )
3. Maritalstatus
(i) Single ( )
(ii) Married ( )
(iii) Divorced/Separated ( )
(iv) Widow/Widower ( )
4. How often do you take part in event marketing?
(i) Weekly ( )
(ii) Monthly ( )
(iii) Quarterly ( )
(iv) Annually ( )
5. Educational Level
(i) SSCE/WAEC ( )
(ii) N.D/NCE ( )
(iii) B.SC/HND ( )
(iv) M.SC/MBA ( )
(iv) Others ( )
57
PART B
SOCIO-ECONOMIC DATA
Introduction: this part will address the following research statements below. Please 
indicate by ticking (√) the appropriate answer. Respondents are pleased requested to state: 
SA, A, U, D and SD (Strongly Agree, Agree, Undecided, Disagree and Strongly Disagree), 
on a scale of 5 – 1 respectively
S/N STATEMENT OF RESEARCH S/A A U D S/D
1. New and existing products can be sponsored 
customer segmentation to gain market
acceptance/patronage.
2 Customer segmentation can be used to
influence the level of organizational sales 
turnover and profitability
3 New product emergence into the market can be 
introduced for market acceptance with the use
of customer segmentation.
4 A dying product or brand can be revived via
customer segmentation
5 Customer buying behaviour helps salesperson
during customer segmentation
6 customer prioritization can be used to gain
competitive edge
7 customer prioritization can be used to position 
an organizational product and image offerings
in the minds of the target marketing.
8 high sales turnover and profitability can be
achieved through customer prioritization
9 customer prioritization influences favorable
attitudes from consumers towards 
organizations product or services.
58
10 customer prioritization help to build better 
relationship between selling organization and
the buyer
11 sales model can be used to build and maintain
organizational corporate image and identify.
12 Efficient and effective use of sales model will 
enhance organizational; sales turnover,
profitability and edge-out competition.
13 New or existing product may fail because of
poor or wrong selling model adoption
14 There is significant relationship between 
multiple sales channels and improved sale
performance of an organization
15 selling model helps salesperson to achieve
customer retention
16 multiple sales channels improve organizational
profitability
17 Adoption of multiple sales channels helps to
create brand awareness
18 multiple sales channels help organization to
reach potential customers and increase sales
19 Adoption of multiple sales channels leads to
customer satisfaction
20 Efficient and effective use of multiple sales
channels will enhance organizational 
competitiveness.